+++
date = '2026-02-05T19:50:51+05:00'
draft = true
title = 'Terraform Provider Development Experience'
categories = ["Terraform", "Go"]
+++

Developing your own Terraform provider might be required when
you have some internal services, and that service and your Terraform
modules are used by many teams. In such cases, having your own provider
and distributing it makes Terraform code cleaner and allows you to avoid
glue shell scripts.

I developed a few providers for our internal services. Below I want to
list points which were interesting for me, or things I missed
initially.

## SDK version

There are two SDK versions available to develop a provider: [SDKv2](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/plugin/sdkv2)
and [plugin framework](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/plugin/framework).
The latter is newer and recommended by Terraform, but that
doesn't mean SDKv2 is deprecated, it is still widely used. Probably
it will take years before everything is migrated to the new one. In my case
I used only the plugin framework as recommended. I also needed to
read other providers which use SDKv2, and there are no problems doing
that. There are differences between them but probably because of the same
protocol it is easy to understand what is going on even with SDKv2.

## Pay attention to how import works

If you start provider development using [scaffolding app template](https://github.com/hashicorp/terraform-provider-scaffolding-framework)
you will see code like this for a resource:

```go
func (r *ExampleResource) ImportState(ctx context.Context, req resource.ImportStateRequest, resp *resource.ImportStateResponse) {
	resource.ImportStatePassthroughID(ctx, path.Root("id"), req, resp)
}
```

I initially didn't pay much attention, but what is written here is directly linked to how
you implement your `Read` function. Basically it means when "import" is
happening your `Read` function will be executed, and only the `id` field
will be available. This impacts how you define your ID — you should be able to
read a resource purely by ID. It sounds easy, but in some cases a resource could
be available only in a nested way. For example, let's say you have a resource
at this path: `/policy/<policyID>/rules/<ruleID>`.

Initially you could select `ruleID` as the id for your `PolicyRule` resource, which
brings a problem with import. For that reason you should probably make your
ID in this format `<policyID>/<ruleID>`. Doing this you can fetch the rule purely
by ID:

```go
func (r *ExampleResource) Read(ctx context.Context, req resource.ReadRequest, resp *resource.ReadResponse) {
	var id types.String
	resp.Diagnostics.Append(req.State.GetAttribute(ctx, path.Root("id"), &id)...)

	parts := strings.Split(id.ValueString(), "/")
	policyID := parts[0]
	ruleID := parts[1]

    // Define your http req

	// If applicable, this is a great opportunity to initialize any necessary
	// provider client data and make a call using it.
	// httpResp, err := r.client.Do(httpReq)
	// if err != nil {
	//     resp.Diagnostics.AddError("Client Error", fmt.Sprintf("Unable to read example, got error: %s", err))
	//     return
	// }

	// Save updated data into Terraform state
	resp.Diagnostics.Append(resp.State.Set(ctx, &data)...)
}
```

This of course means import should be run like this:

```
terraform import <policyID>/<ruleID>
```

## Keeping client code in same repo as your provider

There is a recommendation to not keep your client code for the service
in the same repository as your provider. But for me it was a better option
to avoid additional maintenance, as the service client wasn't going
to be used by anyone else. Probably it means if your company is big enough
to have internal services, but not big enough to have Go SDKs for them,
don't hesitate to keep your service's client code in the same repository.
Of course keep isolation between client code and provider code (mixing them
is definitely not a good idea).

For me it simplified overall development, as the service client and provider
were implemented at the same time.

## Logging approach

In Terraform, structured [logging](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/tutorials/providers-plugin-framework/providers-plugin-framework-logging) is used.
In my case I needed to log not only from the provider, but from the
client code as well. I also wanted to keep some isolation (in case I would need to
move the client code to a separate repository). For that I implemented
an interface:

```go
type Logger interface {
    Debug(ctx context.Context, msg string)
    Info(ctx context.Context, msg string)
}
```

On the provider side, add a logger struct:

```go
type ClientLogger struct {
}

func (c *ClientLogger) Debug(ctx context.Context, msg string) {
    tflog.Debug(ctx, msg)
}

func (c *ClientLogger) Info(ctx context.Context, msg string) {
    tflog.Info(ctx, msg)
}
```

In your client code, accept a logger as a parameter:

```go
type ExampleClient struct{
    Logger Logger
}

func (c *ExampleClient) Execute(ctx context.Context) {
    // this log appears if TF_LOG=INFO
    c.Logger.Info(ctx, "Starting execute something")
    // do something
    // add more debugging logs if needed, this log appears if TF_LOG=DEBUG
    c.Logger.Debug(ctx, "Debugging information")
}
```

In my case, logging as much information as possible in case of errors
was very helpful. Especially during Terraform executions in pipelines.

Also check diagnostics logs: https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/plugin/framework/diagnostics

